So what is Dijkstra shortest path?
Obviously, it is calculating
the shortest path from one
node to all other nodes in the graph.
Which means we can also specifically
find it to an individual node as well.
Because once you have the full graph
marked out, it's very easy just to find
that one path from A to B long
as you have a previous list.
Makes sense?
Makes sense,
just like our Breadth First Search,
we'll be using Breadth First Search for
Dijkstra as well.
I want to go over Breadth First Search
because it requires a previous array
because in Dijkstra's we
require a previous array.
Does that make sense?
Awesome, all right, there are a bunch
of variations to this and
I'll probably program one that sucks,
just so
you can know that there
is one that doesn't suck.
Does that sound great?
Fantastic, isn't that just
the way we always wanna do it?
Okay, so
let's talk about Dijkstra's shortest path.
It's actually a family of what is
referred to as a greedy algorithm.
So it's actually pretty dang simple.
When you write out just the steps that
you need to take, you look at it and
go, wow, it's actually absurdly simple.
Is that not absurdly simple?
Okay so let's rewrite a graph that makes
some sort of sense I liked that previous
graph I wrote, so I'm gonna give it
my best effort of how to do that.
So we're gonna have this, we're gonna
have a 1, we're gonna have a 5,
we're gonna have a 1, by the way
Dijkstras, non negative weights.
So if there's a negative weight you're
gonna screw up all of Dijkstras,
don't do that, this will be 6
1 7, there we go.
So if this is 0,1, 2, 3, 4,
the obvious answer is
that we go from 0 to 2,
to 4, if 0 is our source and
4 is our sync.
That makes sense, right?
If you just look at the graph, 5 plus 1
is 6, that would be our shortest path.
If you go 0 to 1, which is 1,
then to 7, that's 8, then to 4.
What is that?
9, right, or the other way around.
You'd get 7, 8, 9,
you get the same answer, right?
So our three possible paths for those
that don't see that is this which is 6.
This, which is 1, 7, 8, 9 or, and
then of course through here,
which again is 9.
So there you go,
we see the shortest path 0, 2, 4.
So how do we do this?
Well, Dijkstras,
it's a very clever algorithm,
it initially started off as
a V-squared running time.
But it's gotten a lot better
through some sweet optimizations,
including one of the data structures
we made today makes it into
a sweet optimize graph structure or
graph search.
So first let's look at
what's gonna happen here.
So the general way we do this is we still
have that same previous array because
we need to know how to walk it.
So we do the exact same
algorithm that we did before.
We have negative ones all the way in here.
So we know with whom have I came from.
Second, we need the exact same thing,
we can have a seen array depends
on the data structure you use.
You actually don't need a seen array but
we'll have it for now.
All right and we'll fill it with
a bunch of falses, awesome, right?
Lastly, we're gonna need a way to
calculate what is the shortest distance.
So what we're gonna have,
is we're gonna have a distance array and
this will be filled with infinities,
except for our source node.
What is the distance of our source node?
>> Number of nodes?
>> No, zero.
Right, if you're already at the place you
wanna be, how far do you have to travel?
Nowhere, right?
It's greatest, right?
And so of course we'll put a zero here,
we'll pretend our source is the last node,
right, just depends on what is passed in.
So in our case,
it's gonna be 0 for our searching.
So we put a 0 at wherever our source is,
and we'd also take our seen and
make that a true wherever our source is.
But again, we don't have to use a seen
array if we use the right data structure.
So effectively how Dijkstra
shortest path works,
is that we get the lowest or the nearest
unseen node, or unvisited node,
meaning at first that's just
our source array, right?
Because everything else has infinity.
So those ones are unvisitable, but
our source one is visitable
at a distance of 0, right?
Right ,so you can imagine
one way to do this,
is we scan through our distance array.
And when we get to zero we're
like hey have I seen you yet?
I haven't seen you,
awesome, we're gonna start with this
one cuz this is obviously the smallest
distance,let's start right here, cuz
the rest of the distance is our infinity.
So this is the smallest unseen item.
So at that point we would mark it seen.
So I'm gonna kind of start right here.
So let's pretend this thing
has already happened.
And then we'll keep doing this, while, and
I'm gonna just use a function here,
has unvisited.
Okay, I'm just gonna use this because I
don't wanna give away the game quite yet.
So, however we choose to do that could
affect how fast our algorithm runs.
So right now, we're scanning through
every single node effectively by walking
through our seen array and
or distances array, right?
That means you're doing that V amount of
times every single time you call that
function.
Cuz you have to scan them all to find
the minimum one you have to scan it all to
make sure you have the minimum
one that's unseen.
All right, so there we go,
we have this part done, this is fantastic.
Now, what do we have to do?
Well, we are gonna get the lowest one.
So I'm gonna to call this
one low equals get lowest.
Right?
Get lowest unseen, right?
I will put U there for unseen,
I don't wanna have to keep writing,
way too high and
we're gonna mark this one as seen, right?
Once we have done this, we've already
seen this, we don't need to do it again,
awesome.
So at this point our first iteration
we're currently using the source, right?
Perfect, so now what do we need to do?
Well, now we need to walk
through all of its children and
then we need to do something.
So let's break this problem
down just a little bit.
If you think about it,
if you look at this graph right here,
the shortest distance from zero
to one is this link, right?
It wouldn't matter however many other
links there are, when the only distance
I know is this distance,
the distance to myself being zero.
The next possible shortest
distance is this one, right?
It wouldn't matter what else the graph
looks like it wouldn't matter if this
thing had a distance of one,
you cannot get any possibly closer right?
So, during the first iteration of
the graph, we get the source node,
which is the closest possible
node because it's 0.
The next iteration, we are gonna find the
closest possible node to the source and
that is the shortest distance.
No matter how you bake it, that is always
gonna be the shortest distance because you
can kind of argue that in your own head.
If you have an entire series of node and
you find the shortest distance from
where you start to the next node,
that will always be the shortest
distance at that point, right?
You can never make it any shorter, but
then this is where it gets interesting.
If you use the distance to that node,
plus the distance to all the nodes
it's connected to versus the distance
to all the nodes I'm connected to.
Whatever is the shortest that time becomes
the next possible shortest path that is
possible in your graph.
And that's how Dijkstra work,
it just works one at a time,
updating the distances for
who has the shortest distance where.
And so that explanation is not necessarily
the best, but code is always really,
really good to see that.
So let's do this.
We're gonna go for edge, in low, right,
so that is our current lowest item.
I want to walk every single edge.
So again, we'll do the same
kind of base case checking.
If seen, Then continue.
Make sense, right?
If we've already seen this node,
we don't need to look at this node, right?
Now, we can just simply move on.
All right, so now that we have this edge,
we need to do some updating here, right?
We need to go okay.
If the distance from you or
the distance to me plus the distance to
you is shorter than any other
distance we've seen thus far,
we have now found a newer
shortest path to that node.
Does that make sense?
Cuz at first we start with all distances
infinity except for the one I'm at,
then we say hey out of all
the nodes I'm connected to,
have we found shorter distances?
Well, of course because every
distance is infinity, so
the nodes you're connected to
are instantaneously closer than infinity.
And you'll see this as it works out,
you'll see how this eventually works.
So let's do this.
I kinda wanna make this
a little bit different.
I'm gonna make this just to make this one,
I'd say a little bit better.
Yeah let's do that, I'm gonna do that just
to make this kinda a little bit better
cuz I feel like this would just
be a better example there.
All right, so now that we have this,
we have our seen and
now we need to calculate its distance.
Its distance is gonna be
the distances of low, right?
The distance it took to get to low,
which in our case is 0 for
our first node plus the edges weight.
Make sense, right?
That would literally be the distance
at any one point, awesome.
If that distance is
less than the distances
of our last known best distance,
ellipses of our edge, right.
So say our edge is 1, If there's any other
best distances to it then we have now just
outperformed it in distances therefore we
have found a shorter path to that node.
And once we've done that,
we can then say it's previous or
how it got here of edge Is now low, right?
We have now just updated how we got to
this node with the shortest possible
distance and
then we need to update its distance array.
To equal our new smaller distance,
All right, this of course is also a very
magical thing that we can do that can
also help make this
algorithm run much faster.
So if you think about this,
what we have right here,
we will eventually go through every single
node that we are possibly connected to.
Getting lowest means that we have any node
that has a distance of infinity means it's
unreachable based on the node we're at,
cuz there are nodes that
will be unreachable.
You could imagine a situation in which we
have something that looks like this right?
Node, 7 is right here, it points to 0,
but 0 never points to it.
So therefore it is literally
an unreachable node in this case.
There we go, this thing is covered,
that is the algorithm of Dijkstra for
shortest path.
We keep on getting the lowest distance
node and then trying to update all
the other distances based on this new
lowest path we found and it's greedy.
So each time you find the shortest path
that literally is the shortest possible
path within the graph at
that individual moment.
So there we go.
So again, we have to do the exact
same thing we've done before,
meaning that when we
want to build this path,
we do need to walk backwards again
through, we have our previous array.
We start from our needle and then we're
gonna have to walk backwards we just got
done doing that, we will do it again
if we implement Dijkstra shortest path.
It's pretty straightforward but
I want to kinda talk about something.
I'm having a little bit of
a battle with myself do we
want to implement this first or do we
want to discuss its running time first.
Let's implement it and
then let's talk about his running time,
cuz I feel like if we implemented first
we're going to see how was done we can
discuss that running time then we
can discuss how to make it faster